Core-hosting with AddNServiceBusEndpoint (#8206)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/hosting/core-hosting.md

---
title: Recommended hosting model
summary: Use AddNServiceBusEndpoint with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting for the recommended single-endpoint and multi-endpoint hosting model.

> component: Core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component: Core
versions: '[10,)'
```

## Hosting a single endpoint

Register the endpoint on the host's service collection. For new development, this is the recommended alternative to the `UseNServiceBus` pattern in `NServiceBus.Extensions.Hosting`.

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointSingle

The endpoint starts and stops with the host's lifecycle. `IMessageSession` is available in dependency injection for components that need to send or publish from outside a message handler.

For most applications, a single endpoint per process is the simplest place to start.

## Hosting multiple endpoints

NServiceBus also supports hosting multiple logical endpoints in one process. This is typically useful when a single-endpoint host is not the right fit. Common scenarios:

- Multi-tenant systems where each tenant requires an isolated endpoint.
- Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host.
- Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process.

Compared to a single-endpoint host, each additional endpoint adds registration, startup overhead, and coordination within the shared process. Keep the configuration and endpoint identities explicit so the host remains easy to reason about.

> Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. Pass an identifier string as the second argument to distinguish them in dependency injection:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. EndpointName is used to distinguish them in dependency injection:
```

Reviewer 3: I actually prefer the current wording because from the perspective of the API it is correct how it is worded right now

Author: The new per-tenant snippet below this one passes a tenant (not EndpointName) as the identifier, so "Pass an identifier string" stays accurate

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointMulti

The endpoint name is the recommended identifier. A distinct identifier is only required when the same endpoint definition is hosted more than once with different per-instance configuration — for example, a per-tenant deployment where the endpoint name is composed at runtime.

> ### Endpoint-scoped dependencies

Reviewer 2: Do we need to somehow mention "global" dependencies as well?

Reviewer 3: @andreasohlund It is

> Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally on `IServiceCollection`

The question is: Do you want it to be more prominent?

Reviewer 2: ah, missed that, I think that is fine

> When a shared service needs its own per-endpoint instance, register it as a [keyed service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) using the endpoint name as the key:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a shared service needs its own per-endpoint instance, register it as a [keyed service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) using the previously chosen (e.g. endpoint name) identifier as a key:
```

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointKeyedServices

> Each endpoint resolves its own instance from the keyed slot. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each endpoint resolves its own instance as keyed services using the previously chosen identifier as a key. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally (non-keyed) on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.
```

> For the migration path from `EndpointConfiguration.RegisterComponents`, see the [NServiceBus 10 to 11 upgrade guide](/nservicebus/upgrades/10to11/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is still possible to use `EndpointConfiguration.RegisterComponents` and the API will internally automatically use the right approach regardless whether a single endpoint or multiple endpoints are used. The API is obsoleted with a warning and it is recommended to migrate to explicit registrations shown above. For more migration guidance see the [NServiceBus 10 to 11 upgrade guide](/nservicebus/upgrades/10to11/).
```

## Endpoint identity and the DI identifier

- **Endpoint name** — the NServiceBus identity set on `EndpointConfiguration`. Drives the input queue, routing, diagnostics, and log context. Unique across the system.
- **Endpoint identifier** — the dependency-injection slot used to resolve this endpoint's `IMessageSession` and keyed dependencies. Scoped to a single process. Defaults to the endpoint name.

In a single-endpoint host, the two are the same value and the distinction does not matter. In a multi-endpoint host, each endpoint retains its own input queue, `IMessageSession`, and per-endpoint configuration.

## Logging

> Core uses [`Microsoft.Extensions.Logging`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/logging/) as its built-in logging infrastructure. Log events flow through the host's configured `ILoggerFactory` with endpoint context attached. The `NServiceBus.Extensions.Logging` package is no longer required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NServiceBus uses [`Microsoft.Extensions.Logging`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/logging/) as its built-in logging infrastructure. Log events flow through the host's configured `ILoggerFactory` with endpoint context attached. The `NServiceBus.Extensions.Logging` package is no longer required.
```

---

> title: Recommended hosting model

Reviewer: I'm struggling with what we call this. This can only be the "recommended hosting model" as long as we don't replace it, then what would it be called? But "Microsoft Generic Host" is a dead term, right?

Author: @DavidBoike Yea, I've gone back and forth on this title a few times. What about "Hosting with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting" ? Technically right but not "hey you should favor this"

Author: For the menu, I think this fits:
<img width="494" height="214" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d01af134-9fae-4adc-a4d5-edd255af0c1e" />

The page title as "Hosting with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting" 
<img width="950" height="205" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/01997b7d-dfb7-4be5-b7dc-4ad3874ce1ea" />

summary: Use AddNServiceBusEndpoint with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting for the recommended single-endpoint and multi-endpoint hosting model.
component: Core
versions: '[10,)'
reviewed: 2026-04-27
related:
  - nservicebus/upgrades/10to11
  - samples/hosting/generic-host
---

> Starting in NServiceBus version 10.2, the recommended way to host NServiceBus is through `Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting` by registering endpoints with `IServiceCollection` using `AddNServiceBusEndpoint`. This aligns endpoint startup, dependency injection, and logging with the standard .NET hosting model, and it supports both the common single-endpoint case and advanced scenarios that host multiple endpoints in one process.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be more accurate to say something like 10.2 takes a dependency on Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting and offers hosting capabilities without requiring any other NServiceBus packages?

BUT

Remember that 6 months after 10.2 is released, 10.1 is no longer supported, and this page is V10 and up only. We should be thinking about this documentation through the lens of what it will look like to someone building an endpoint after NServiceBus 11 is released, and less like an upgrade guide.

Author: I reframed this and dropped the legacy note

> ## Choosing an integration path

Reviewer: Because of the previous comment, this should not be presented as "yet another choice you have to make" to use NServiceBus. We need to consider how people reading this when V11 is out and presenting it as "This is the way".

If we want to put in a partial that shows a note box about the old way in V10 only, that's possible though.

NServiceBus provides two integration paths with `Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting`:

- **Built-in integration** (recommended): use `AddNServiceBusEndpoint` on `IServiceCollection`. Available starting in NServiceBus 10.2.
- **Package-based integration** (legacy): the [`NServiceBus.Extensions.Hosting`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/NServiceBus.Extensions.Hosting) package and its `UseNServiceBus` method are no longer the recommended path. Existing applications should plan to migrate; new applications should use the built-in integration.

For details on the `UseNServiceBus` approach, see [NServiceBus.Extensions.Hosting](/nservicebus/hosting/extensions-hosting.md).

## Hosting a single endpoint

> Register the endpoint on the host's service collection. For new development, this is the recommended alternative to the `UseNServiceBus` pattern in `NServiceBus.Extensions.Hosting`.

Reviewer: Don't compare to UseNServiceBus just tell how to do it

Author: Line now reads simply "Register the endpoint on the host's service collection:"

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointSingle

> The endpoint starts and stops with the host's lifecycle. `IMessageSession` is available in dependency injection for components that need to send or publish from outside a message handler.

Reviewer: Could we use slightly more precise language about what happens with the IMessageSession?

Author: tightened up with snippets

For most applications, a single endpoint per process is the simplest place to start.

## Hosting multiple endpoints

> NServiceBus also supports hosting multiple logical endpoints in one process. This is typically useful when a single-endpoint host is not the right fit. Common scenarios:

Reviewer: After saying "It supports more than one" it's kind of silly to say "this is useful for when 1 is bad". Kind of sounds like the commercials that say not to take the drug if you're allergic to the drug.

- Multi-tenant systems where each tenant requires an isolated endpoint.
- Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host.

> - Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to add something hand-wavy about modular monoliths?

> Compared to a single-endpoint host, each additional endpoint adds registration, startup overhead, and coordination within the shared process. Keep the configuration and endpoint identities explicit so the host remains easy to reason about.

Reviewer: > Keep the configuration and endpoint identities explicit so the host remains easy to reason about.

I think a reader will ask "What does that mean?"

> Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. Pass an identifier string as the second argument to distinguish them in dependency injection:

Reviewer: I think this part should lead the section, with all the "scenarios" and stuff coming after.

I would also prefer if we were explicit about the endpointIdentifier being used as a ServiceKey (or whatever DI-docs-recognizable noun) and also linking to MS docs about keyed services.

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointMulti

The endpoint name is the recommended identifier. A distinct identifier is only required when the same endpoint definition is hosted more than once with different per-instance configuration — for example, a per-tenant deployment where the endpoint name is composed at runtime:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointPerTenant

In this case the endpoint name distinguishes each runtime instance for routing, while the tenant key serves as the DI identifier so callers can resolve a specific tenant's `IMessageSession` and keyed services.

### Endpoint-scoped dependencies

> When a shared service needs its own per-endpoint instance, register it as a [keyed service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) using the previously chosen (e.g. endpoint name) identifier as a key:

Reviewer: Is that wording awkward at the beginning? Would "When each endpoint requires a different implementation of a shared service" be clearer?

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointKeyedServices

> Each endpoint resolves its own instance as keyed services using the previously chosen identifier as a key. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally (non-keyed) on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each endpoint resolves its own `DatabaseService` instance as keyed services using the previously chosen identifier as a key. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally (non-keyed) on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.
```

Reviewer: But also, "resolves the same instance" isn't correct unless it's a singleton, right? You could still have scoped or transient service descriptors. How do we make that more accurate?

Reviewer 3: Let's avoid going down the route of scopes and try to find a language that describes "endpoint-specific services" vs "services shared between endpoints" which we sometimes call "global". But maybe we need a crisper distinction.

> It is still possible to use `EndpointConfiguration.RegisterComponents` and the API will internally automatically use the right approach regardless whether a single endpoint or multiple endpoints are used. The API is obsoleted with a warning and it is recommended to migrate to explicit registrations shown above. For more migration guidance see the [NServiceBus 10 to 11 upgrade guide](/nservicebus/upgrades/10to11/).

Reviewer: This is upgrade guide material.
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Is it though? When I added this suggestion, I came from the angle of "this is deprecated with warning for v10" which means you can, for the lifetime of v10 decide to ignore this or use it "because it is more convenient or you already had this in place". So I saw this section as "Hey, look, you can, but you should really consider the upgrade guide over there"

I can see both approaches having their pro and cons and some of your comments indicate some form of principle we should always follow when writing major version documentation and that major version is embarking in a different direction. Maybe we can extract these principles and populate them into the docs review skill?

> ## Endpoint identity and the DI identifier

Reviewer: I don't like abbreviating DI in the title, and I really don't like just dropping into a bullet list. Maybe the heading should be "Understanding endpoint identity" and there should be an intro sentence about how it's important to understand the difference between the endpoint name and the identifier used to group/correlate/specify services for endpoints.

And does queue name deserve a mention?

> - **Endpoint name** — the NServiceBus identity set on `EndpointConfiguration`. Drives the input queue, routing, diagnostics, and log context. Unique across the system.

Reviewer: > Unique across the system

I don't think that's true?

Also, either we can write complete sentences, or if we're really trying to be terse, we can put all of this in a comparison table.

Author: thoughts? <img width="1327" height="894" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a10cc648-2ca5-4735-9fc3-b70fd11e7dae" />

- **Endpoint identifier** — the dependency-injection slot used to resolve this endpoint's `IMessageSession` and keyed dependencies. Scoped to a single process. Defaults to the endpoint name.

In a single-endpoint host, the two are the same value and the distinction does not matter. In a multi-endpoint host, each endpoint retains its own input queue, `IMessageSession`, and per-endpoint configuration.

> ## Logging

Reviewer: I could see a sample of how log output looks with multiple endpoints, but most of the stuff below this line is upgrade guide material.

Author: I cleaned up upgrade guide material in general. I did not show a log output sample as you suggested yet.

---
title: Hosting with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting
summary: Host NServiceBus endpoints with Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting using AddNServiceBusEndpoint, for both single-endpoint and multi-endpoint scenarios.
component: Core
versions: '[10,)'
reviewed: 2026-04-27
related:
  - nservicebus/upgrades/10to11
  - samples/hosting/generic-host
---

> NServiceBus endpoints are hosted with [`Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/generic-host) by registering them on `IServiceCollection` using `AddNServiceBusEndpoint`. Endpoint startup, dependency injection, and logging align with the standard .NET hosting model, and the same registration approach supports both single-endpoint and multi-endpoint hosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NServiceBus endpoints are hosted with [`Microsoft.Extensions.Hosting`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/generic-host) by registering them on `IServiceCollection` using the `AddNServiceBusEndpoint` method. Endpoint startup, dependency injection, and logging align with the standard .NET hosting model, and the same registration approach supports both single-endpoint and multi-endpoint hosts.
```

## Hosting a single endpoint

Register the endpoint on the host's service collection:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointSingle

The endpoint starts and stops with the host's lifecycle. `IMessageSession` is registered on the host's `IServiceCollection` and can be resolved from the service provider:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointGetSession

Or injected into controllers, background services, or any other component that needs to send or publish from outside a message handler or other NServiceBus extension point:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointInjectSession

> For most applications, a single endpoint per process is the simplest place to start.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For most applications, a single endpoint per process should be the default.
```

## Hosting multiple endpoints

NServiceBus also supports hosting multiple logical endpoints in one process. Common scenarios:

- Multi-tenant systems where each tenant requires an isolated endpoint.
- Modular monoliths where each module owns its own endpoint within a shared host.

> - Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host.
- Competing consumers co-located in the same process that require a shared in-memory synchronization primitive
```

> - Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process (for example to save the memory overhead of multiple processes to achieve a more dense hosting).
```

> Compared to a single-endpoint host, each additional endpoint adds registration, startup overhead, and coordination within the shared process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compared to a single-endpoint host, each additional endpoint adds registration, startup, and coordination overhead within the shared process.
```

> Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. The second argument to `AddNServiceBusEndpoint` is the DI identifier — a [service key](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) used to distinguish that endpoint's `IMessageSession` and per-endpoint keyed services:

Reviewer: Still not sure I like inventing a term "DI identifier" that is completely absent in the source code.

> snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointMulti

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointMulti

It is recommended to encapsulate endpoint specific configuration including the call to `builder.AddNServiceBusEndpoint`inside an extension method to keep the composition root lean and simple to understand.

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointMultiLean
```

> A distinct DI identifier is only needed when the same endpoint is registered more than once in a process — for example, a per-tenant deployment where each tenant has its own input queue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, the endpoint name is the ideal identifier to separate endpoint-specific services in the service collection. A distinct DI identifier is only needed when the same endpoint is registered more than once in a process — for example, a per-tenant deployment where each tenant has the same point but with its own input queue:
```

> Most of the time, the endpoint name is the ideal identifier to separate endpoint-specific services in the service collection. A distinct endpoint identifier is only needed when the same endpoint is registered more than once in a process — for example, a per-tenant deployment where each tenant has the same point but with its own input queue:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the time, the endpoint name is the ideal identifier to separate endpoint-specific services in the service collection. A distinct endpoint identifier is only needed when the same endpoint is registered more than once in a process — for example, a per-tenant deployment where each tenant has the same endpoint name but with its own input queue:
```

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointPerTenant

> All tenants share the `Sales` endpoint name; each gets its own [input queue](/nservicebus/endpoints/specify-endpoint-name.md#input-queue). A tenant-scoped identifier (`Sales-<tenant>`) lets callers resolve a specific tenant's `IMessageSession` and keyed services. Including the endpoint name in the identifier keeps it unique when other endpoints (for example, `Billing`) are also hosted per tenant in the same process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All tenants share the `Sales` endpoint name; each gets its own [input queue](/nservicebus/endpoints/specify-endpoint-name.md#input-queue). A tenant-scoped identifier (`Sales-<tenant>`) lets callers resolve a specific tenant's `IMessageSession` and [keyed services](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services). Including the endpoint name in the identifier keeps it unique when other endpoints (for example, `Billing`) are also hosted per tenant in the same process.
```

### Endpoint-scoped dependencies

When each endpoint requires a different implementation of a shared service, register it as a [keyed service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) using the chosen endpoint identifier (typically the endpoint name) as the key:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointKeyedServices

> Each endpoint resolves its own `DatabaseService` instance as keyed services using the previously chosen identifier as a key. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally (non-keyed) on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the snippet above each endpoint resolves its own `DatabaseService` instance as keyed services using the previously chosen identifier as a key. Services that do not vary per endpoint are registered normally (non-keyed) on `IServiceCollection` and every endpoint resolves the same instance.
```

### Resolving services per endpoint

Inside NServiceBus extension points — message handlers, sagas, features, and installers — per-endpoint services resolve automatically from the right scope. `[FromKeyedServices]` is not needed in those contexts.

Outside extension points (for example, controllers, background services, or any host-level component that needs to send or publish), use `GetRequiredKeyedService<T>(identifier)` from the service provider or `[FromKeyedServices(identifier)]` for constructor injection:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointGetKeyedSession

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointInjectKeyedSession

> Global (non-keyed) services and per-endpoint keyed services can be mixed in the same constructor:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Non-keyed (global) services and per-endpoint keyed services can be mixed in the same constructor:
```

| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Identifies     | The logical endpoint (queue, routing, log context)  | The DI registration for `IMessageSession` and per-endpoint keyed services  |
| Set via        | `new EndpointConfiguration(name)`                   | Second argument to `AddNServiceBusEndpoint(config, identifier)`            |
| Required       | Always                                              | When more than one endpoint is registered on the same `IServiceCollection` |
| Unique across  | Logical endpoints in the system                     | Endpoint registrations in the process                                      |

When a DI identifier is needed, the endpoint name is the recommended value. A different value is only needed when the same endpoint definition is hosted more than once in one process — for example, a per-tenant deployment. See [Hosting multiple endpoints](#hosting-multiple-endpoints) for the registration patterns.

## Logging

> NServiceBus uses [`Microsoft.Extensions.Logging`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/logging/) as its built-in logging infrastructure. Log events flow through the host's configured `ILoggerFactory` with endpoint context attached. The `NServiceBus.Extensions.Logging` package is no longer required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NServiceBus uses [`Microsoft.Extensions.Logging`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/logging/) as its built-in logging infrastructure. Log events flow through the host's configured `ILoggerFactory` with endpoint context attached.
```

## Hosting a single endpoint

Register the endpoint on the host's service collection:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointSingle

The endpoint starts and stops with the host's lifecycle. `IMessageSession` is registered on the host's `IServiceCollection` and can be resolved from the service provider:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointGetSession

Or injected into controllers, background services, or any other component that needs to send or publish from outside a message handler or other NServiceBus extension point:

snippet: AddNServiceBusEndpointInjectSession

For most applications, a single endpoint per process should be the default.

## Hosting multiple endpoints

NServiceBus also supports hosting multiple logical endpoints in one process. Common scenarios:

- Multi-tenant systems where each tenant requires an isolated endpoint.
- Modular monoliths where each module owns its own endpoint within a shared host.
- Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host.
- Competing consumers co-located in the same process that require a shared in-memory synchronization primitive

> - Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process (for example to save the memory overhead of multiple processes to achieve a more dense hosting).

Reviewer: Aligning periods since none of these are complete sentences
```suggestion
- Multi-tenant systems where each tenant requires an isolated endpoint
- Modular monoliths where each module owns its own endpoint within a shared host
- Partitioned throughput where each partition is an endpoint sharing a host
- Competing consumers co-located in the same process that require a shared in-memory synchronization primitive
- Co-located infrastructure endpoints that do not justify a separate process (for example to save the memory overhead of multiple processes to achieve a more dense hosting)
```

Compared to a single-endpoint host, each additional endpoint adds registration, startup, and coordination overhead within the shared process.

> Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. The second argument to `AddNServiceBusEndpoint` is the endpoint identifier — a [service key](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) used to distinguish that endpoint's `IMessageSession` and per-endpoint keyed services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each endpoint is registered with its own `EndpointConfiguration`. The second argument to `AddNServiceBusEndpoint` is the endpoint identifier — a [service key](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/dependency-injection#keyed-services) used to distinguish that endpoint's `IMessageSession` and per-endpoint keyed services within the dependency injection container:
```
